## Week 1

**Select one work from each volume that you read and for each write:**

**What makes the work a piece of digital writing**
**A personal response (whether you liked it, how it made you feel)**

The Fall of the Sit of Marsha – Rob Wittig (volume 1)

This is a hypertextual story as shown through the devolution of a blog page in three stages. It plays with existing digital forms of a blog to create a story of a woman's life. It manipulates the digital elements, such as glitching text and images, to show the devolution of her life/the website. The background image gets darker over each stage. I think the exploration and combination of technology (the website) and the religious/spiritual/metaphysical was fascinating, since those two concepts are typically considered opposites, and it was interesting to see how digital writing allowed for the exploration of two opposing ideas. The websites didn't function perfectly – sometimes opening each link would be missing certain elements, or they'd be structured/organised differently, and I'm not sure if it's on purpose or just old old tech. There were also links to external websites that didn't work anymore, so I'm not getting the full story, which is disappointing. 

Facade – Michael Mateas & Andrew Stern (volume 2)

Facade blurs the line between game and writing more than other pieces of e-lit. But it does have a narrative and has multiple arcs that the reader can discover through their different inputs. It was technologically innovative at the time, as the artificial intelligence at the core of the piece allows for the reader to interact with the characters in a way that hadn't been done before. I remember trying to play this game with my friends when I was a kid, but I didn't understand the purpose or narrative arcs, just that it was meant to be a game where you could talk to characters. Naturally, this meant my experience with the game was influenced by nostalgia, but I really enjoy this piece. It's fun to see what input elicits certain reactions from the characters and recognising the patterns and rhythms that the characters are trained to hit, as well as how these can be disrupted. I also enjoy the mystery of the two characters' relationship, more specifically, the issues in their relationship, and trying to find the proper input to get the proper reactions so that they confess their issues.

The Hunt For The Gay Planet – Anna Anthropy (volume 3)

The Hunt For The Gay Planet is a hypertext Twine game that satirises the video game *Star Wars: The Old Republic*, which was updated in 2013 to include queer characters, but only on one planet. The player explores planets in search of 'Lesbionica', the gay planet. It was really fun to navigate the different planets and eventually find Lesbionica. I also really enjoyed the witty, tongue-in-cheek voice of the text, which heightens its satirical nature. Since the piece was made in 2013 – the (relatively) early days of Twine – I wonder how much the possibilities of the piece were limited by Twine's capabilities at the time. I wonder if Twine was able to support sound/image/lots of colour back then. Or even if there was a limit to the lengths of the texts.

Blackout Poetry Tool – Jazer Chand (volume 4)

The Blackout Poetry Tool is a tool that allows a human and a bot to collaborate to create a piece of blackout poetry. It can only exist in a digital medium, as it is centred on the human/bot dynamic and relationship. The bot follows a pre-set grammar sequence, so that its selections for the blackout poem are grammatically sound. It raises interesting questions regarding dichotomies – human/technology, emotional/mechanical – and challenges binary thinking. It also challenges notions of ownership/authorship. I also feel like it's particularly relevant in the current day regarding generative AI and the idea of 'computer-generated literature'. This piece was written in 2020, before that stuff even existed, and it's really interesting to see it with this new cultural context. 

## Week 3

**What elements of the works ("Taroko Gorge", "The Gathering Cloud", "First Draft of the Revolution", and "Shade") do you read? How are those elements meaningful?**

Taroko Gorge – Computer/code-generated text, nature-based words, creates unique and ever-changing poems out of preset subjects, verbs, and objects. The flow-like nature of the words on the screen resembles the flow of the water of the gorge, and readers are invited on a meditative journey, much like the hike through the national park. 

The Gathering Cloud – Layered paragraphs of historical, scientific, and poetic writing about both meteorological and data clouds. A collage of images, paragraphs and interactive/dynamic elements. Hovering over hyperlinked words opens up new paragraphs, new images, and moves images. The work draws a clear parallel between cloud data storage and climate change, and is heavy in its use of metaphor.

First Draft Of The Revolution – Editing and revising letters sent between husband and wife during the French Revolution. Editing the letters allows for more information and context to be revealed, exposing the psychology, relationships, and tensions of the characters. What can and cannot be written exposes the constraints in the characters' lives, and what they are/aren't willing to expose to each other. Invites the reader to reflect on letter-writing, especially now that it's obsolete as a communication system, as well as the contemplative nature of letters as compared to modern text messaging. 

Shade – Typed commands trigger narration and movement of the character around their bedroom. It's difficult to navigate unless you know the specific words to put in. I had trouble with this text, as it was difficult to figure out which words were the correct ones to trigger the appropriate dialogue. This creates a unique relationship between the reader and the text. It's like the personal nature of second-person POV taken to the next level, and they are the ones directing the character around the room. 

**How are the works read differently from print literature? How is electronic literature different from print literature? What are the qualities of the works we might consider as qualities of electronic literature?**

Most of the works require some type of interaction and agency from the reader. They must navigate their way through the text rather than having it laid out flat for them, like in print literature. The reader is no longer a witness to the events of the text but rather an active participant. The relationship between the author and the reader and the text is incredibly different in e-lit.  Taroko Gorge is different in that it doesn't require the same interaction from the reader, but is based around the code-generated text. The randomised generation can't be recreated in print text; the feeling of 'flowing' could possibly be recreated through unique formatting, but it still wouldn't have that ever-changing quality, and would be an entirely different text. From what I've seen, The Gathering Cloud has been published as a physical book, but I couldn't find what it looks like on the inside, and I'm curious how the e-lit piece translates into print literature. Maybe it's more academic, or more collages, or a combination of both. E-lit also places a heightened importance on the visual elements of the text. Print literature is usually constrained by the static nature of its form, while e-lit has a lot more freedom. There is a lot more capability for the manipulation of colour and images, and can even have moving/changing colour and images and can include videos. 

## Week 5

**This week's Required Reading (Aarseth 1997) unpacks some territory that speaks directly to some of the great questions raised in your Case Study presentations, such as "in what sense can a hypertext be a narrative? Is hypertext a literary genre or a literary technique?" It introduces the important concept of "ergotics": "hypertext is not a reconfiguration of narrative but offers an alternative to it, as I try to demonstrate through the concept of ergodics." (p.95)**

**What do you think of Aarseth's concept? Explain how it offers an alternative to conventional ideas of narrative and the role of the reader and writer.**

Aarseth’s concept of ergodics was really interesting and helped me shift how I think about the relationship between the reader and the author and the text in a piece of electronic literature. It shifts the emphasis away from the story and its outcome and onto the act of moving through the text. It emphasises the experience of reading and moving through and exploring the text, as well as the effort taken by the reader to read the text. I was fascinated by this, as my writing practice is typically focused on the story itself, and I never had an opportunity to allow for the reader to experience and move through the text using 'nontrivial effort'. I was interested in the idea of the 'responsibility of the reader' in exploring the text. It is something I haven't thought about, especially in the context of e-lit, a reader could just go through the text without finding all the pieces of writing – finding shortcuts, skipping passages, etc. This can happen in printed literature, but the likelihood is more prevalent in e-lit because of the effort it takes for the reader to move through the piece. It has made me consider what I can do in my project to guide the reader through the piece and encourage them to fully experience the text. 

There is also the proposed 'levels of narrative'. Hypertext has three: narration, description and ergodics, as well as how these levels can conflict with each other. It portrays the uniqueness of the role of the reader in electronic literature. The narrative version of the text that the reader will have by the end of their experience with the piece will be stamped by the reader's thumbprint. This creates an almost co-creation of the final story that the reader experiences. This type of authorship by the reader cannot be achieved in traditional, printed literature, as it does not require any extra effort or responsibilities from the reader to move through the text.

## Week 6

**How does this work make you reflect on your own ideas and what you might do for your own piece?**

I'm grateful that we got to see the Bitsie game. It was nice to see the possibilities of what you can do with it, and I want to try playing with it for my piece. But the same also goes for the other pieces, and seeing the possibilities of Twine. It raised thoughts of how I can use colour and sound to manipulate the reader's senses and invoke a feeling and emotion in a way that traditional literature can't. Colour can often evoke subconscious emotions – yellow is happy, red is angry, etc. – but also the way different colours interact with each other, and the relationship between background and font colour and how this can affect the reader's experience. I'm interested in the setting and the idea of exploring a location – very similar to House on the Hill, I know – and I have a vision in my head of what my game will look like and seeing the pieces and the different techniques they use to ground the reader in a location has inspired me to consider concrete possibilites of how I can bring my vision to reality. I think I have gone from a vague, foggy idea of some dungeon-crawling-type piece to something more specific.

I am still nervous, though, that I just won't have the necessary skills to make my piece real. I want to make a game in Bitsie, but I'm not skilled at drawing or anything like that, so I don't know if that will affect my ability to create my piece. Of course, I'm just doubting myself, but we still haven't learnt Bitsie yet, so maybe that will go down. Or maybe I'll just have to get over it.
